slaid: Example
Fig. 1 shows an example TPot specification, consisting
of two proof-oriented tests (POTs) and a global invariant.
POTs specify the main functional correctness properties, and
global invariants help prove their correctness. TPot verifies
the system in two steps. First, it symbolically executes the
initializer followed by the global invariant and ensures that
the latter must return true. Then, TPot symbolically executes
each POT under the assumption that the invariant holds over
the initial system state, proving all assertions. For each POT,
TPot also ensures that the invariant must return true over
the final system state, which concludes an inductive proof.

slaid: TPot architecture
Fig. 3 shows TPot’s architecture. With TPot, developers write,
in C, functional correctness specifications as POTs and in-
variants, using the verification primitives that TPot pro-
vides (§4.1). TPot lowers POTs, global invariants, and the
implementation code into LLVM intermediate representation
(IR), to avoid dealing directly with the complicated semantics
of C [43, 48]. TPot then performs exhaustive symbolic execu-
tion (SE) over each POT, using a custom symbolic executor
based on KLEE [ 8 ]. During SE, TPot checks for violations of
conditions asserted by the POT, as well as low-level errors,
like memory safety violations and division by zero.
During verification, TPot uses the Z3 [ 23] SMT solver to
decide the feasibility of each branch and to enumerate all
possible targets for symbolic pointers. The TCB of a system
component verified with TPot includes TPot itself (which
builds on KLEE), user-written specifications (POTs), Z3, and
the LLVM toolchain

slaid Design goals:
First, the specification language should be
familiar to developers without verification expertise, and
they should not have to learn new languages for the purpose
of verification, even if they might need to learn new specifi-
cation primitives. Second, as much as possible, developers
should not have to write intermediate specifications for the
purposes of verification—they should only specify the behav-
ior they are interested in verifying. Last, the specification
language must enable the right combination of expressiveness
and automated reasoning. It should be expressive enough to
specify safety of critical system components and to express
functional-correctness properties of interest. On the other
hand, it should be restrictive enough that properties can be
encoded into SMT in a way that decreases risks of instabil-
ity [40, 46], and avoids common causes of solver explosion.

slaid Language overview:
Table 2 summarizes the 8 primitives
with which we extend C. TPot’s specification language ex-
tends a conventional symbolic execution (SE) API with global
invariants, heap primitives, and a restricted form of univer-
sal quantification. The SE primitives ( 1 – 3 ) define symbolic
variables, restrict their values through assumptions, and assert
conditions expressed as C boolean expressions. This style of
specification resembles property-based tests [17], which re-
cent research [ 7 ] suggests are acceptable to developers. Using
these primitives, developers express functional correctness
properties as POTs. TPot encapsulates shared properties in
functions, making C functions serve the same purpose as
logical predicates in other C verifiers [3, 34, 38, 57

slaid Global invariants. 
To facilitate the specification of stateful
components, TPot includes the notion of global invariants,
which are conditions that are expected to hold over the global
state both before and after each API function execution. TPot
treats any boolean function whose name starts with inv__
as a global invariant (such as inv__owners() in Fig. 4).

slaid Naming. 
Specifying heap-manipulating programs requires
two facilities missing from conventional SE primitives: mem-
ory safety predicates, and mechanisms to concisely con-
trol aliasing. Interactive verification tools often provide
these facilities through a permission system like dynamic
frames [39, 64 ], separation logic [59], linear types [42], or
ownership types [37]. Permission systems often require de-
velopers to explicitly manipulate proof state (e.g., fold and
unfold predicates), while linear and ownership types restrict
the implementation by disallowing certain forms of aliasing.
TPot instead addresses these needs through a naming-
based abstraction exposed through primitives 4 – 6 . These
primitives simplify and automate heap reasoning in the ab-
sence of recursive data structures. This is enabled by a crucial
observation: each block of memory can be identified by a
unique name, or a unique name-index pair. We next motivate
and explain the naming abstraction through an example, then
present a rule for renaming and discuss quantified naming.
Naming example. Figure 5 presents a toy system that main-
tains two dynamically allocated integers whose addresses are
stored in global variables p1 and p2. The system’s initializer
allocates the integers and its single API function increments
the integer p1 points to. spec_incr_p1 is a POT specifying
the behavior expected of this function.
To understand inv__alloc’s purpose, consider the sce-
nario where it is omitted. Without a global invariant specify-
ing otherwise, p1 and p2 can have arbitrary pointer values,
including null or a dangling value. Therefore, dereferencing
either would cause a memory safety error, and so the POT
would fail at line 15. To avoid this, we need a global invariant
stating that p1 and p2 both point to allocated memory.

slaid Universal quantification.
To keep reasoning about the
specifications automatable, TPot does not support conditions
that are universally quantified over all values of a type. In-
stead, TPot allows universal quantification over memory
regions through primitives 7 and 8 , which TPot’s specifi-
cations can use to quantify properties over all elements in
a collection, e.g., an array. For instance, while one may not
quantify over integers generically in TPot specifications, one
may quantify over all integers in an array.
Developers can use the forall_elem primitive to quan-
tify properties over contiguous blocks of memory and
names_obj_forall_cond to quantify over more flexible
groups of objects described by quantified naming. Impor-
tantly, TPot can encode these properties into SMT queries
that do not involve quantifiers in most cases (§4.3). Re-
stricting quantification on stateful objects in this way also
sidesteps gnarly soundness issues related to allocatedness of
quantified variables

slaid Custom Memory model
Our memory model separates the heap from global vari-
ables and from the stack. While global variables and stack
objects have concrete base addresses and sizes, heap objects
have symbolic ones. TPot uses additional SMT constraints to
encode that the ranges specified by symbolic base addresses
and object sizes do not overlap. To avoid a quadratic number
of constraints with respect to the number of heap objects,
TPot fixes an ordering of objects in the heap. While TPot
fixes an ordering, it does not constrain the distance between
subsequent objects. Otherwise out-of-bounds accesses to
an object could be unsoundly deemed as safe accesses to
another object. Moreover, an additional level of encoding
indirection (§4.3) ensures that the fixed order of objects does
not unsoundly imply an ordering between pointer values.

slaid TPot SMT encoding
- Eliminating quantifiers. Universal quantifiers are a com-
mon cause of solver explosion, as they may cause the solver
to discover an arbitrary number of facts that are not useful
for solving the current query. Worse, some combinations of
quantifiers give rise to matching loops [ 40], compounding
the issue and leading to unpredictable verification times.
To ensure the stability of its SMT encoding, TPot han-
dles most quantifiers without sending quantified queries to
the solver. Specifically, TPot only makes quantified queries
before lazily materializing an object whose existence is im-
plied by a names_obj_forall condition. Normally, memory
resolution queries exclude the quantified memory safety
constraints (over heap_safe) that encode names_obj_forall.
When TPot fails to prove the safety of a memory operation, it
retries the safety check once per such quantified constraint,
including one of them each time. In this way, the impact of
quantifiers on verification performance is controlled: lazily
including quantified constraints in this way makes it likely
that they will be useful in solving the query; each query
is given a single quantifier with triggers picked to avoid
self-loops, so matching loops are avoided; and the process
happens at most once per object, just before instantiation
- Converting pointer values, heap addresses, and object
sizes to integers. Since TPot does not distinguish between
pointers and data and supports bit-level operations over both,
it needs to represent pointer values, heap addresses, and ob-
ject sizes as 64-bit vectors. However, we have found that
doing so naively tends to leads to solver explosion in the
form of bit-blasting over these values. When the solver fails
to solve a query involving bitvectors heuristically through
bitvector arithmetic, it tries to discharge the query using
propositional logic, which entails interpreting a 64-bit vec-
tor as 64 independent boolean variables, giving rise to 264
combinations.
With a naive encoding, bit-blasting happens frequently
during pointer resolution, since heap addresses relate to each
other through bitvector arithmetic. To mitigate this, TPot
converts bitvectors to integers during pointer resolution,
allowing Z3 to use integer arithmetic solvers.
Converting precisely between bitvectors and integers (e.g.
using the bv2int function offered by Z3) is prohibitively
costly for SMT solving and can itself cause instability. In-
stead, TPot approximates the bv2int conversion using an
uninterpreted function tpot_bv2int that assumes overflow-
free semantics and is explicitly axiomatized.
- Query simplification. To further stabilize SMT solving,
TPot includes a custom query simplifier. Unlike prior ap-
proaches that simply propagate constants and equalities [ 8 ],
TPot’s simplifier performs much more extensive simplifi-
cation, often involving intermediate SMT queries to check
whether certain simplification is possible. While intermedi-
ate queries can impact TPot’s verification time negatively,
they benefit its stability as they may prevent solver explo-
sions in more complex queries. Below, we present two exam-
ples of the types of simplification TPot performs.
- Read after write. For expressions of the form
(Read (Write 𝑂 𝑥 𝑗) 𝑖), TPot checks if it is possible
to simplify to either (Read 𝑂 𝑖), or 𝑥. To achieve this, TPot
makes SMT queries to check if i is provably equal to or
provably different from j.
-Constant offsets. During pointer resolution, if TPot infers
that the difference between a pointer and a base address
must be constant, it caches and reuses this fact to rewrite
byte offsets in later queries. Concretely, while performing a
memory operation (say, a read), after resolving a pointer 𝑝
to an object 𝑂, TPot will construct an expression of the form
(Read 𝑂 (Subtract 𝑃 base_of (𝑂))). If TPot infers that P is
equal to base_of (𝑂) plus some constant, it will substitute P
in the Read, and in all subsequent expressions.