topic: Colored Petri Nets or TLA+/PlusCal

deadline: 16.2.2025

note: you can use either Colored Petri Nets or TLA+/PlusCal (if you are brave)

task 1: create model for air traffic control system at middle-sized international airport (Prague, Vienna)
	- you should capture the following:

	main control tower,
	multiple runways (at least 2),
	several airplanes (take-off, descent),
	input from radar,
	communication between the control tower and some airplanes

task 2: document your solution
	- explain key overall design decisions
	I tried to break the model into 3 parts:
	1. Approaching airport and getting permission to land
	2. Runways
	3. Preflight (setting everyrthing up for the takeoff)

	In PetriDotNet I tried to create several single tokens and on complex (consists of those single ones). Plane is a complex token that consists of singles: 
	plane_vehicle (just abstract object) and allowed_to_land (has bool values), but again I was not able to run simulation at all. The idea was that single tokens can take some paths
	and then in case of success they could assemble into one complex token and move forward (for example with approaching allowed_to_land would go through transition send_msg_about_approaching
	and in case of success it would move Plane forward to one of the runways.) But I did not find a way to simulate it.

task 3: evaluate your solution (model) according to the following criteria
	- level of abstraction (in the sense "what details you ignored")
	Specific details of some of the stages of the air traffic. Only preflight and approaching was described in details.

	- level of approximation (over-, under-) in the sense "over-specification/over-constraining (specification is too restrictive) versus under-specification/under-constraining (model is too permissive)"
	It was definetely under-specification as a lot of details were not described. Probably one of the problems was that I did not know what I can describe with CPN and was not sure that some parts
	that I tried to describe were described in a right way.

	- ambiguity versus precision
	I tried to capture details of couple of the procedures precisely, but only couple, otherwise the model would become confusing (at least for me).

	- completeness (all scenarios)
	Only basic scenario with little details was described.

task 4: tell me your opinion about the modeling language, tool, and the whole approach (methodology) based on your personal experience
	- specifically, can you imagine to use something like that (whole approach) in practice given proper tool support in some IDE
	This language and tools (IDEs for it) are the worst of the all languages that we had in this course. CPN: potentially great for capturing behavior of the constantly changing
	environment, but the language is very poorly described. There is almost no examples, tutorials. For CPN I did not find any examples, the were only for Petri Nets, and even then,
	they were trivial and the same across different sources. As for the IDEs, I was not able to install CPNTools or CPN IDE, as the programs would not start on my computer. I tried to
	use PetriDotNet, I was able to install and run it, and I tried to follow tha manual on how to use it. It was not very successful as I tried to create some trivial models in petri nets, that
	I was even able to run, but when I tried to create model in CPN I could not run the simulation at all. And in the end I did not find the reason why. The manual of PetriDotNet does not
	describe or provide any examples on CPN.

	- possible usage scenarios to consider: validating the design of a complex system, capturing and validating requirements (maybe for consistency), precise documentation
	Again potentially great tool for modeling something like a plant, airport, trainstations and visual demonstration. But I still have a feeling that I do not know how to use it, what IDEs to use,
	what exactly I can demonstrate with this modeling tool and how to do it.

resources:
	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_traffic_control
	https://science.howstuffworks.com/transport/flight/modern/air-traffic-control.htm

