Nataliia Korop
n.corop08@gmail.com

Deadline: 12.5.2024

Requirements:
- You do not have to procotol absolutely everything, such as 'cd' commands,
  'rm -rf' when the task tells you to do a 'rm -rf', 'vim file', etc.
- Include output of commands only when explicitly requested.
- You can write answers in Czech.

Useful links and help:
  http://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/
  http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Syslog.html
  man pages of respective tools
  https://visualvm.github.io/


-----
Tasks
-----

The main goal of this assignment is to get some practice with tools for logging and monitoring of program behavior.

1. Choose your own program of a reasonable size and complexity, written in C++, Java or C# (e.g., term project / "zapoctak").

2. Implement logging into the program, using some framework (library) available for the language and platform (e.g., Log4j for Java, log4net, or syslog API).
   Configure the logging framework such that log messages are saved into the file "events.log".
   Log some important events of your choice (such as warnings and error situations).
   For each logged event, record also the name (ID) of the current thread, current time in seconds, and source code location (class, method), if possible.
   Report fatal errors also to console, in addition to the file "events.log".


3. Submit the program (source code), some kind of a diff that shows the added logging commands, and configuration of the logging framework.

 For diff.txt use "cat diff.txt". Configuration is:
 - sudo nano /etc/rsyslog.conf
 - local0.*        /var/log/events.log
 - sudo systemctl restart rsyslog

4. Choose some long-running program in C# or Java, for example a web server or some GUI application (text editor, game).

5. Use any mature runtime monitoring tool for the respective platform (VisualVM for Java, or .NET Memory Profiler) to get a report of memory usage.
   In the case of VisualVM and Java, get the list of Java classes sorted by the size of memory (heap) fragments taken by all their instances together.
     Record the list of Java classes roughly 5 minutes after you start the program.
     You can provide just around top 20 classes (bit more or less is fine), depending on how many records fit on the screen of your computer.
   In the case of C#/.NET, use the .NET Memory Profiler (that should be available in recent Visual Studio) to get the total amount of memory used by all instances of each individual class.
     Record the information (in the form of a screenshot or text file) at some point during the program execution.
     The profiler can be downloaded here: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=SciTechSoftware.NETMemoryProfiler.

The report is in file simpleWebServer.diagsession, file can be opened in VS. When I tried to run .NETMemoryProfiler on apps that werent mine, I could only see the whole memory usage, there were no details.
I suppose it was because I did not have source code of those programs. Therefore I desided to run profiler on one of my Advanced C# assignments. Assignment was to implement simple Web server. In the file 
simpleWebServer.diagsession I was able to find detailed information about memory usage by the program. 

6. Submit the report of memory usage in some form (a text file or screenshot).

7. Pick some rather mature tool for measuring test coverage of projects in your preferred language (Java or C#) and use it on your own large program with unit tests, just to see how much your code is really covered by tests that you have written.
   Submit the report of test coverage in some form (a text file or screenshot).


-------
Survey:
-------

We use the survey to evaluate the labs (tasks) and homework assignments.
It is completely voluntary, but useful for future tuning of the content and level of complexity of the labs.
Most questions can be answered using the scale from 1 to 10.
Write your answer under the corresponding question.

(1) How new was the topic and content of the lab for you?
     (1 - brand new, 10 - I already knew everything) 3


(2) Do you think that the content of this lab was useful?
     (1 - useless or too trivial, 10 - very useful) 7


(3) How do you evaluate the level of complexity of the homework assignment?
     (1 - too trivial, 5-6 - just about right, 10 - too demanding or complex) 5


(4) How do you evaluate your prior experience with the tool in the context of the homework assignment?
     (1 - I already know and can use everything, 10 - I tried everything practically for the first time) 10


(5) How much time (in minutes) did you spend working on the homework assignment? 200


(6) Additional space for your own comments on the lab and homework assignment:
 

